and the more pain you experience the
more dopamine you can achieve if you get
back on the avenue of pursuit
this is about more energy and it's about
more clarity and less time wasted
it's not just picking a particular
disease and trying to figure out what
the recipe is that the one size fits all
but it's really
a journey that we have our whole life
if something's valuable you'll make
sacrifices to attain it we could let go
of something we value in the present and
we would gain something we value even
more in the future
because if you think about most of the
growth in life comes from these rigidly
externally imposed schedules and we hate
them but they are where we learn
restraint
because once you're real about it then
you can make progress but if your energy
cycles go to bullshitting yourself
you'll never get out of it
when you wake up in the morning you are
in a perfect position to what i call
receive the download of all the work
that your neural circuitry has been
doing the night before but if you
immediately go to a sensory experience
especially a rich sensory experience of
stuff scrolling by you're actually
missing the information that you
processed at night and even more
importantly that second half of the
night during rem sleep is when the
emotional weight of things start becomes
let's say
you put it on the shelf properly things
that are important to emotional
emotionally register get put in one
shelf things that were like the comment
you got on twitter that was triggering
doesn't seem like such a big deal after
a good night's sleep and that's because
that second half of sleep is actually
when you re-experience these things but
your body can't secrete adrenaline it's
kind of an internal form of therapy or
even trauma therapy and that's why
people who don't get that sleep are very
you know they're easily agitated they
feel like the world is crushing down on
them so when i wake up in the morning i
want to receive ideas that i want to
learn from my learning and if you take
in new information you are not in a
position to do that and 60 minutes is a
tough one so i give myself two no-gos
for the 60-minute block if i can do it
and i'll tell you a lot of mornings i
fail tom i don't do it interesting i
just i found that shocking but i heard
you say that in another interview and i
was like well i mean i'm human you know
there are mornings where
um i get enticed or worse
worse i find myself reflexively picking
up the phone without having made the
conscious decision and that's when
i realized that
you know we are all deep in this process
and i think
uh we have to regulate it the the
experiment i'd like to do maybe you'll
do this with me as a challenge because
the challenge is always good is in the
new year i actually want to take every
odd waking hour of the day off the phone
so even hours of the day
as long as it's waking i'm willing to
have it on and work with it but odd
hours just turn it off no matter what
i don't know if this will destroy most
of the relationships
but just to see can i do it on a rigidly
externally imposed schedule because if
you think about most of the growth in
life comes from these rigidly externally
imposed schedules and we hate them
but they are where we learn restraint
identity to me is something that's
practical
it's it's
your identity is a
uh
it's like a dramatic role
that you play out in the world
and
while playing that out it has to furnish
you with a life
and what that means is that it has to be
it means that it has to be negotiated
with other people
when you're a very young child
and you first start to play with who you
are
you live in a fantasy world and
according to some developmental
psychologists at least
particularly this is grounded in the
theories of piaget that very young
children two or three are quite
egocentric
in their play
they play according to their own rules
and so they're not social yet until
they're three or four
which means that they have their own
goals in mind
and then they erect a little fictional
world around those goals
and then they play out the role within
that fictional world and that's pretend
play and when they get to be about three
or four
and they start playing with other kids
they have to bring
their worlds together and negotiate
because both children have to want to
play
and so that means identity has to expand
beyond its egocentric focus
and
increasingly be negotiated in the social
world
i studied developmental psychology for a
long time especially in relate in
relationship to the
regulation of aggression and
most children
learn to regulate the regression between
the ages of two and four
now
for example for for instance there's a
subset of children mostly male who are
very aggressive at the age of two
comparatively speaking they bite kick
fight hit and steal that's the
definition of
aggressive
and
almost all those children are socialized
out of that by the time they're four
although a small proportion aren't and
they tend to be long-term anti-social
children and then criminal adults it's
very very difficult for that to be
rectified
if it isn't rectified by four
what happens with most children is they
learn to move beyond their ego-centric
presuppositions
and include other children in the play
and so they start to negotiate their
roles and identity is a sophisticated
identity is a negotiated role and so
it's not appropriate for associated with
who
with everyone
with everyone and of course you know
this is the case because if you if you
well first of all if you're a child and
you want friends
then you can't insist that only your
game be played
so i'll give you an example
there's been observational studies of
children in playgrounds
so imagine there's a group of children
together let's say they're six or seven
years old and they're playing helicopter
so they've got their erasers out and
they're buzzing around in the
helicopters okay so they've already
established the ground rules they've got
together and they laid out the drama
they say well
let's play helicopter and maybe there's
four or five suggestions but the group
the group uh um
develops a consensus that helicopters
the fun game and let's make our erasers
into
helicopters i don't have an eraser well
you can use your pencil and it can be a
long helicopter so everybody gets a role
and everybody's happy about it otherwise
play won't continue right everybody has
to be happy or play won't continue
and so then
the the little drama organizes itself
and the kids play helicopter and there's
consequences of that that play out like
a story and then maybe another kid comes
along and he's got an eraser and a
pencil in his bag and he wants to play
helicopter too and if he's a socially
sophisticated kid he'll hang around the
outside of the little game
and watch and then he'll take out his
eraser and maybe start making buzzing
noises with it and when when he can see
that there's an opening in the play
situation he'll swoop in and maybe he'll
get integrated
it's like when you're at a cocktail
party and you hear a conversation and
you're hovering around the edge you wait
for an opening and then you say
something that's germane to the topic
and if you're sophisticated enough
and the people are friendly enough then
it'll open and you'll be allowed in
now even popular kids often get rebuffed
when they try to enter an already
structured game unpopular kids don't
watch what's going on and then they come
along and try to impose their game on
the entire group and then they have a
tantrum if they don't get let in
and so that's a good example of how
identity is negotiated at the earliest
stages
we have to construct a narrative about
it
that moves us forward
and this is why i'm such a firm believer
that you should do
and believe
that which moves you towards your goals
people get the do part
they understand their actions should be
actions that take them towards what they
want to accomplish but people often miss
the most important part which is only to
believe things that move you towards
your goals
and i see people every day
that tell themselves the story about
themselves that they are worthless
that they're meaningless
that they're pointless
that their friends and family would be
better off if they just died
so we have to find a way to construct a
narrative about ourselves
that empowers us that lifts us up
even though
even though we make mistakes even though
we fall down even though
we're never going to get things right
all the time and even though terrible
things happen to us
or maybe we do terrible things
but in that
the erosion of the self
that's the danger the erosion of the
self that is the danger
and when i talk to people about the 80
20 principle 80 of the time you should
be focused on the things that you love
the beautiful things that you want to
bring to this world the beautiful things
that are already in the world
and 20 of the time you should be kicking
yourself in your ass and saying you can
do better
it's such a powerful idea
but the problem is when people get to
the 20 percent they forget that it's
only supposed to be 20 of the time and
that it's meant to be these acute
moments where you're pushing yourself to
be more to do more it isn't so you can
tear yourself down
that's why
you have to do and believe that which
moves you towards your goals and if
thinking that you're a worthless piece
of [__] moves you to your goals somehow
then fine do it but i can't literally
fathom a universe in which that would be
a logical way to move forward
can you get people really fast because i
want to get back to what an ideal fast
looks like according to fast this way
but first give people a quick breakdown
about how you put your body in a state
where it will produce ketones and
exactly what they are
ketones are what happens when your body
burns fat instead of sugar naturally it
doesn't happen if you're consuming
carbohydrates in any meaningful amount
and it doesn't happen if you're eating a
ton of protein
and
what happens when you do that is ketones
have more energy in them than glucose
does and the neurons in your brain love
ketones in fact all the cells in your
body do but some of them prefer blood
glucose so all the sudden you get this
feeling of clarity and the natural way
to get into ketosis is you fast for
about two days for the average person
sometimes three and then the body says i
got nothing here i better start burning
my fat stores so it liberates some fat
from the fat stores and all the toxins
from the fat it liberates as well which
is why it's good to mop them up while
you're fasting and then your cells get
get this and they go oh man we've got to
reformat our power plants because
they're used to only having sugar
so it takes metabolic energy to
transform and they literally change
their shape and function so that they're
better at consuming fat right and that
takes a while now you're metabolically
flexible but if you do that all the time
forever your cells are like why would i
ever be configured to do glucose i live
in a world with no sugar so they aren't
very good at that which is why cycling
in and out of ketosis fasting some of
the time but not other times and not
fasting the same way every day or every
week is really powerful you want to keep
the body a little bit off balance so
it's like you know what i'm ready to
make energy at any time rapidly from any
type of fuel and when you do that you
can actually go out and have a bowl of
hopefully dairy-free ice cream
without bad fats in it so a
coconut-based ice cream and
with real sugar and everything and it'll
happen your blood sugar will go up and
come right back down and you'll be fine
and that's a metabolically flexible
person you do it all the time you won't
be metabolically flexible
right but if you're the guy who has ice
cream every single night
well then what's going to happen is
you're not going to know how to burn fat
whatsoever your body's gonna be only
sugar burning and it's it's not gonna
work and your blood sugar will always be
high so the idea is occasionally it's
okay to have some carbs i don't
recommend you know ice cream is a major
source but honestly if you're
intermittent fasting you're occasionally
in ketosis
you ought to be able to eat a treat that
isn't full of inflammatory stuff like
bad oils and all and be just fine and
the evidence is that people whose
metabolisms work really well they can do
it and their blood sugar doesn't go
bonkers
well so
as a medical doctor i train in internal
medicine
which means that i take care of young
and old men and women healthy and sick
you know i
have spent most of my career not only in
sort of the the
the center the thick of the current of
modern medicine which is largely about
prescriptions and knowledge largely
about
diagnosing and treating disease the
thing that's different about me though
is i started realizing with all the
successes we've had you know
treat new treatments for 12 different
types of cancers that didn't exist
before you know
that
we were really only tackling
part of the equation because wouldn't it
be much better if we could actually
prevent the disease in the first place
and what's interesting
is the same science that teaches us how
to intercept and tackle a disease using
drugs
actually teaches us
in some ways a hell of a lot more about
how to prevent the disease in the first
place how do we actually you know um not
just pick up the pieces after the time
bomb explodes or the stick of dynamite
but how do we actually pull the fuse out
or disarm the time bomb right so that's
what got me really interested in
diverting my scientific
focus
from treatments to taking a look at
prevention now if you're talking about
disease it's pretty straightforward
diagnose it find a treatment write a
prescription refer to a specialist if
you're talking about prevention you're
really talking about health and this
brings me full circle to where you where
you started what we're starting
so what is health right i mean i'm just
like everyone else well if i'm not are
you healthy well if i'm not sick i'm
actually healthy right so in most
people's minds including mine
not being sick is kind of the default
definition of being healthy
but that is very problematic because the
absence of something the absence of
disease
is very is impossible to operationalize
you can't do something about the absence
of something else
so that's what i started to ask well
what is health if it's not just the lack
of disease
well it turns out
that and this has been my research it
turns out that health is not just the
absence of disease it is the result
of our body's own hardwired
defense systems health defense systems
that we're born with these are defense
systems are formed in the womb before
we're born and the moment we appear on
planet earth our health defenses are
firing in all cylinders from day one
all the way to our very last breath
and all of a sudden that gives us a
whole new canvas to understand what can
we do to support health what can we do
to boost our body's health defenses
you see if you have a functional
identity
when you act it out in the world
then you get what you want and need
and if an identity doesn't do that well
then you should
you either retool or your identity
or you retool the world
your conception of the world
well
if you're retooling your conception of
the world then you're retooling yourself
no you can actually i mean what a
revolutionary does is try to bring the
world into alignment with literally
yes literally well and we all do that to
some degree because we are practical
engineers you know i mean
not only do we
perceive the world
but we also interact with it so that it
does manifest itself in accordance with
our desires there's limits obviously to
how far you can go or how far you should
go with that
you know and
um what are the limits well there's
practical limits nature won't do what
you want it to unless you're
very sophisticated in your
in your application of your knowledge
and other people will object
so
now you might say well you should forge
forward regardless of their objection
and
you know there are circumstances under
which that's true
but
generally speaking that's not a very
good idea it certainly doesn't make you
popular as a child and so that brings up
one other issue i would also say and
this i developed this idea quite a bit
in
the new book
you go from egocentrism as a child you
have to go through this period where
you're socialized
as a child and adolescent and that
really means that you allow your
identity to be molded and shaped by the
group
and you know you think about how
important peers friends and peers are to
children and adolescents you know your
mother will say when you're a teenager
well if johnny jumped off the bridge
would you too
and you say well no but the real answer
is well probably if all your friends are
there taunting you you would in fact
jump off the bridge and not only that
generally speaking you should
because
it's your
duty
it's your developmental duty as a child
and a teenager
to
take your
your isolated self and turn it into us a
functioning social unit
now
you could say well do you peterson wants
everybody to be a functional social unit
a robot you know a cog in the wheel
and i would say well that that isn't
where development stops
it has to go through that period before
you can emerge as a as a genuine
individual which means you have to know
the rules of the game before you can
break them
but
not being able to abide by the rules is
not anything like being a genuine
creative individual those are not the
same thing and there's plenty of attempt
to confuse the two things because it's
much better if you can't follow the
rules
to view yourself as a
avant-garde revolutionary than as a
failure
when i became an entrepreneur knew
nothing about it and i was who's the kid
in the server room and i was the only
one with an office that had no windows
and there were like nine other computers
in my room and nobody knew who i was and
the only contribution i made to phone
calls was to say goodbye at the end of a
conference call i'm not kidding
ten years later
i own
a billion dollar business
who the [__] is laughing now
but it only worked because i didn't mind
looking stupid
it only worked because i wasn't asking
myself whether i was worthy or whether i
deserved it
i just asked myself am i leaving it all
out in the field yes or no
am i learning yes or no and if i'm not
i didn't go oh that makes me a bad
person
i went i need to change my actions to
get a different result
and once you start thinking like that
and you literally value yourself
for how hard you're trying how much
you're learning how willing you are to
accept when you fall in your face so you
don't try to get out from under it or
campaign to convince people that you're
better than you really are [__] on
where you're at
because once you're real about it
then you can make progress but if your
energy cycles go to bullshitting
yourself you'll never get out of it
before we started rolling though i had
this whole interview planned i knew
exactly where we were going to go and
then you made a comment i was bringing
up bitcoin and cryptocurrency as i do
because i'm obsessed and you said well
there's only one biological currency and
that's dopamine that's right and i was
like well now i know where we're
starting what do you mean by that yeah
so you know human beings have evolved
tons of technologies uh and currencies
bitcoin ethereum are not topics i know a
lot a lot about but when you think about
dollar euro bitcoin ethereum you think
about wins and losses
in sport in life and relationship in
anything something in your brain and
body has to keep track of that did you
win did you lose what's a letdown what's
a celebration and
i think one of the most important
findings in the last few years in
neuroscience is that
while the molecule dopamine
is associated with reward it's more
about
motivation and craving
there's a really classic experiment now
that people use to demonstrate this take
two rats and
the rats independently separate cages
can level press
for food
or when they can access food
there's a little bit of dopamine that's
released anytime they get some food so
we always thought that food
like many other rewards
like food sex warmth when you're cold
cool when you're too warm
is triggering the release of dopamine
but
someone had the good idea to deplete
dopamine in one of those animals
and then what you find is that the
animal without
dopamine still enjoys food
still enjoys other pleasures so dopamine
is not really involved in the enjoyment
of those pleasures it's involved in
motivation because if you make the
animal have to move just one rat's
length
believe it or not to get to that lever
the animal with dopamine will work to go
get that thing it will work through some
effort to go get the reward whereas the
animal or it turns out the human without
much dopamine
can still experience pleasure they can
sit on their couch and cram their face
with pleasure inducing
calories or what have you
watch inducing things on the television
but they have very little motivation to
go pursue things that will deliver them
pleasure there are different types of
immunotherapy broadly speaking
immunotherapy is harnessing your body's
own immune system to fight the cancer
which is different than inventing a
toxic drug
or even or even a smart bomb you know a
targeted drug to actually go after the
cancer
so immunotherapy relies on your immune
system it is true what you just said
there are some very specific kinds of
immune systems where you can remove your
immune system reprogram it you know kind
of turn it from
uh you know
turn it from
an ordinary immune cell
into a super soldier okay and then
inject it back in the body and it will
go and go after the cancer but there are
other forms of immune
therapy where what you're what you're
doing and this is what i was talking
about
cancers like to develop these sneaky
ways of hiding from your immune system
they cloak themselves you know like the
old star trek the klingons would turn on
cloaking device and now you can't the
enterprise can't find the enemy ship
okay well that's what cancers actually
do some immunotherapies all they do is
they rip the cloak off the cancer and
the immune system goes regular immune
system goes aha i see you i'm going to
come after you and i'm going to get you
because what keeps you and i
uh
from actually developing lethal cancers
right here right now tom is that our
immune system is spotting little tiny
harmless microscopic cancers and saying
i see you you're gone okay you're dead
meat and they just clear off it's like
taking an eraser just erasing the cancer
right off the chalkboard all right so
when you uncloak the cancer it allows
your immune system to do this the best
example of this is former president u.s
president jimmy carter
when he was in his 90s he developed a
melanoma that had spread to his liver
and his brain
and you know it was at that point this
is about 10 years ago now almost 10
years ago
a brain metastasis from a skin cancer
melanoma is pretty much a death sentence
and so he was happy he happened to be
one of the first people to actually get
a treatment that ripped the cloak off of
the melanoma cells in his brain and
elsewhere
and it allowed his 90 year old immune
system to see that cancer and even at
that age even with that spread he had
all this cancer cleared out of his
system can you get people really fast
because i want to get back to what an
ideal fast looks like according to fast
this way
but first give people a quick breakdown
about how you put your body in a state
where it will produce ketones and
exactly what they are
ketones are what happens when your body
burns fat instead of sugar naturally it
doesn't happen if you're consuming
carbohydrates in any meaningful amount
and it doesn't happen if you're eating a
ton of protein and
what happens when you do that is ketones
have more energy in them than glucose
does and the neurons in your brain love
ketones in fact all the cells in your
body do but some of them prefer blood
glucose so all the sudden you get this
feeling of clarity and the natural way
to get into ketosis is you fast for
about two days for the average person
sometimes three and then the body says i
got nothing here i better start burning
my fat stores so it liberates some fat
from the fat stores and all the toxins
from the fat it liberates as well which
is why it's good to mop them up while
you're fasting and then your cells get
get this and they go oh man we've got to
reformat our power plants because
they're used to only having sugar
so it takes metabolic energy to
transform and they literally change
their shape and function so that they're
better at consuming fat
right and that takes a while now you're
metabolically flexible but if you do
that all the time forever your cells are
like why would i ever be configured to
do glucose i live in a world with no
sugar
so they aren't very good at that which
is why cycling in and out of ketosis
fasting some of the time but not other
times and not fasting the same way every
day or every week is really powerful you
want to keep the body a little bit off
balance so it's like you know what i'm
ready to make energy at any time rapidly
from any type of fuel and when you do
that you can actually go out and have a
bowl of hopefully dairy-free ice cream
without bad fats in it so a
coconut-based ice cream and uh with real
sugar and everything and it'll happen
your blood sugar will go up and come
right back down and you'll be fine and
that's a metabolically flexible person
you do it all the time you won't be
metabolically flexible
right but if you're the guy who has ice
cream every single night
well then what's going to happen is
you're not going to know how to burn fat
whatsoever your body's going to be only
sugar burning and it's it's not going to
work and your blood sugar will always be
high so the idea is occasionally it's
okay to have some carbs i don't
recommend you know ice cream is a major
source but honestly if you're
intermittent fasting you're occasionally
in ketosis
you ought to be able to eat a treat that
isn't full of inflammatory stuff like
bad oils and all and be just fine and
the evidence is that people whose
metabolisms work really well they can do
it and their blood sugar doesn't go
bonkers
in our phenomenological landscape so
that's the world as we experience it
complete with emotions and motivations
and dreams and
so the full range of human experience
including the subjective and the
objective let's say can broadly be
broken into two domains and one is the
domain of things that are beyond our
grasp and reach and that's the unknown
the unknown emerges when the unknown
emerges you tend to experience anxiety
and then there's the the known and i
defined the known very specifically and
very carefully
the known is the place you are
when what you're doing presult produces
the results you want
and i say want because that brings
motivation and emotion into the game so
you're motivated to pursue something
you pursue it and what you want happens
not only do you get what you want but
you get validation for the structure
that governs your perceptions and your
actions now if you
you know imagine that you're um you know
you're lonely
and you approach a young woman in a in a
social situation
um attempting to make some contact with
her um you you want to alleviate your
loneliness and so you hope you make a
good impression and you tell a joke
let's say in a relatively awkward manner
and you get rebuffed
then
you feel you you
you're no longer where you control
you're no longer where you exercise
control and that brings up all sorts of
specters and immediately it's like well
why were you rebuffed well maybe all
women are uh to be despised that's one
theory maybe there's something deeply
wrong with you maybe you're having an
off day maybe it wasn't a very good joke
and so when you don't get what you want
then a landscape of question emerged
questions emerge and those questions can
resonate through different levels of
your identity from the trivial oh i told
the joke wrong to the profound there's
nothing desirable about me and i'll be
alone for the rest of my life
now you asked about identity and i used
the example of a child's game but i
could go through an identity and so i do
this particularly in maps of meaning and
so for example let's say i'm sitting
typing
okay we could decompose my identity so
at the highest level of resolution i'm
moving my fingers
and so that could be my identity i'm the
thing that moves its fingers
and then
slightly at a slightly broader level
than that i'm typing words
and at a broader level i'm typing
phrases and thinking them up and then
sentences
and then paragraphs
and then chapters and then let's say
full papers or books that that's that's
a productive unit so i'm the author of a
book or the author of a paper that's an
identity but then that's nested inside
for me it would be nested inside being a
clinical psychologist being a professor
being a good citizen
and then that's nested in some inside
something that's even broader than that
and i would say that that's nested
inside
a cultural heroism and i don't mean that
specific to me i mean that for everyone
that's the outermost level whether
you're playing out the role of hero or
adversary say
that's that's the highest possible level
of identity that's the level at which
fundamental morality is adjudicated and
there isn't really anything beyond
outside that is it's beyond us it's the
transcendent itself and you're all of
those at any one time
you're all of those levels of identity i
think all of us should have some form of
that fear which if you didn't hear
is to have a vision of the person you
could become
and to reach the pearly gates as it were
see who you could have been contrasted
with who you actually are and be
disappointed by the gap between them
and i love chasing that i think it's a
beautiful chase
but what i hope you guys will do if you
ever find yourself at the pearly gates
disappointed in how much farther you
could have gone
to simply ask one question of yourself
every day
did i give it my all today
dopamine is the neurochemistry of the
pursuit of making sure that i have the
energy to go but do we know how we can
spike that
well first of all it's clear to me based
on your description that you've tapped
into these
uh channels that release dopamine
because craving and wanting whether or
not it's sex or or
money or connection
or anything all right
is
that's the primary trigger for dopamine
release
yeah now sex and reproduction makes the
most sense from the perspective of
evolution uh i mean any species every
species
has tends to have two primary goals one
protect it's young and second make more
of itself usually in reverse order right
so even for people that don't want
children i mean you might not or people
of course not everyone is having sex
just to reproduce but at a primordial
level that's what those circuits are
there for so every species in particular
mammalian species where there's a lot of
parenting and caretaking
of the young
tries to take make more of itself and
everything that you see like maternal
aggression which is a powerful circuit
that gets activated after
females of any species in particular
mammals give birth they will fight to
the death and they gain superhuman
strength in order to protect their young
that's a there's a known circuit for
that in the brain that gets activated
once a female has offspring
and it's robust
what's the ideal split for you
the ideal split is whatever you'll do
and 16 8 is great but for 16 hours of
not eating and then i eat however much i
want in an eight hour window or do you
put limitations in the eating window you
can eat as much as you want during the
window of twinkies
uh you know you can and you'll still get
benefits to be perfectly honest you'll
just get more benefits if you eat good
stuff during the window and that's the
other thing okay maybe you don't want to
go grass-fed only maybe you don't want
to eliminate french fries from your
universe
okay fine intermittent fasting will help
everybody even on a complete crap diet
however you'll be more hungry during
your intermittent fast if you eat crap
so you got to deal with that and ideally
what you're eating after you break your
fast
you can have carbs and not have carbs
but don't have sugar don't have seed
oils and eat grass-fed meat or don't eat
meat
and if you follow those basic principles
and there's other nuances in there what
you find is that you feel really good
and the next morning you wake up and
you're not ravenous
and you're like oh yeah i don't even
want breakfast
and that's a very liberating thing
because if we're spending so many of our
thoughts every day on food food food and
then you just aren't hungry
it really changes things so i want
millions of people to say i'm going to
try this basic thing i'm not going to
worry about getting my diet perfect i
might make a few changes but i'm just
going to learn how to intermittent fast
and what i don't want them to do is what
a lot of the fasting community does
where it's all about the fast and you
know every month i'm going to fast for a
week and what you end up doing is you
get people who become
they basically burn out their adrenals
and so women see sleep problems as the
first symptom that they're overdoing it
and then they see
hormonal problems in their monthly cycle
and then see hair loss and hair thinning
guys same thing but it's usually two to
four weeks out for women first is sleep
problems then you wake up and there
isn't a kickstand
and then
you
it took me a second it got there yeah
and then after that you can see her
thing as well and this is from excess
cortisol because you overdid it and you
could see the same thing from just being
keto for three months straight right
that's why i've always recommended
cycling because i made all these
mistakes when i was learning about all
this stuff it was just very early days
and so how do you make this sustainable
and the truth is fasting the same way
every day is bad for you because it
doesn't lend
your body the idea of metabolic
flexibility it's like oh i live in a
world where there's almost never enough
food so have breakfast every now and
then at least you know saturday morning
have breakfast with your family and you
can have a keto breakfast or you can
have the gluten-free waffles whatever
you want you should be able to handle
that just don't eat bad oils and over
time it takes about two years to replace
half your cell membranes the oil in
those membranes
over time you'll become more and more
metabolically flexible because your
cells work better but if while you're
intermittent fasting you're still eating
a ton of junk food
you won't get that benefit but you'll
get many other benefits of fasting
you're still going to lose weight you're
still going to have
an improved blood sugar profile but not
as good as if you made a few changes in
the diet so this is something everyone
can do that's cheaper and more
convenient than what you do in the
morning right now i can create rules in
my life and then i really stick to those
rules so once i'm very careful about
what rules i put in place because i have
to believe that they will actually lead
me to this goal that's really exciting
for me but if i believe it then i can
put them in and then also part of my
identity is that i'm the type of person
that when i set a rule i follow it so i
can create this loop of like feeling
good about myself and the thing that i'm
pursuing but it really works and i'm
shocked how few people
have the kind of rule that you're
talking about in the new year to say hey
i'm only going to do odd hours there's
no phone yeah well and like i said i'm
not perfect i'm not as disciplined as
you are about my no goes i try i
actually find that tabulating is kind of
fun
it's also fun to get really triggering
comments
and and to not close the dopamine loop
for them i think if people understood um
the dopamine reward prediction error
that we could end all the um
amplifying comment battles online
because what happens is if someone takes
a a jab at you of any kind there's
actually an open dopamine loop waiting
for you to respond and any response
actually gives them that that dopamine
response of success it's a little bit of
a it's like scoring a three-pointer and
the no response actually drops their
dopamine below baseline and that's its
own form of retaliation and i have to be
careful because i don't want to
encourage people to retaliate but any
anything that short-circuits the kind of
madness of getting pulled into
some online battle that's totally
meaningless it's taking people away from
other powerful good things that they
could do in the world
you know we've been talking mainly about
dopamine and its scheduling and about
the fact that it can be attached to
anything i think
many people find it hard to subjectively
attach dopamine to something they don't
want to do this is something that uh if
we'd spoken a year ago i would've i my
answer would have been a little bit
different to the question of how do you
get motivated well one way to do that is
if you are good at subjectively
attaching
dopamine to the pursuit just knowing
okay i really am hungry for this i'm
just i'm going to tell myself that you
know making you know making it one
percent of the way is a success and i'm
going to keep going and i'm going to
keep ratcheting on and that's great if
you can do that but for people that
can't do that understanding this
relationship with a pleasure pain
balance can be more powerful just
understanding the more friction and pain
that you experience the greater the
dopamine reward you will get later and
that serves as its own amplifier of the
whole process of pursuing more dopamine
and then the other aspect of it
is that any time that we're leaning into
action
you know it has the
possibility of being an amplifying
process or a depleting process
and the key to that is making sure that
you're balancing the dopamine and
epinephrine systems you know epinephrine
being this molecule of universal
currency of energy output
could be out of hate or could be out of
love epinephrine doesn't care and
actually dopamine doesn't care none of
these systems care about us they just
work underneath our underneath our
conscious control but when you start to
understand that
hitting the gas pedal is great but
hitting the gas pedal and then coming
off the gas pedal a little bit
you can kind of sit in a more relaxed
rpm actually allows you to go much
further i think that people
leaning into action is terrific i always
say you can either be back on your heels
flat-footed or forward center of mass
the best situation is actually to be
right upright but just know that you can
be forward center of mass at any point
and you know that to take it back to sex
and reproduction because it's a salient
example the arc of of sex is very
interesting because when you think about
autonomic arousal it turns out that the
the arousal stage of sex actually
involves release of dopamine
but is what we call parasympathetic
dominant it's actually has to be relaxed
enough
in order to occur it's not about weight
loss even it's really about health
and because when i was doing my research
to look at different foods that would
activate our health defenses
here's the first thing i was surprised
by it's not like one food or two foods
or five foods or yeah it was more than
200 different kinds of foods and they
were fruits and they were vegetables
they were spices and they were legumes
and they were different kinds of seafood
including shellfish and they were
different kinds of fish beyond salmon
okay and and there's even some dairy
products that can actually have some
benefits as well including fermented
foods like yogurt and sauerkraut and
kimchi and these foods are so ubiquitous
that they are found in the traditional
cultures of every single society but
especially
mediterranean diet which we know is
healthier for us as a pattern an asian
food which we also know is healthier and
so what i started to realize is that
eating to beat disease
is not just picking a particular disease
and trying to figure out what the recipe
is that the one size fits all but it's
really um a journey that we have our
whole lives from the time we're small
until we get old we get older
parents have the opportunity to actually
start feeding their children when as
soon as they're taking solid food foods
that can actually help them beat
diseases in fact in fact breastfeeding
is actually helping your child
beat disease by
uh shaping and sculpting their
microbiome right one of the health
defense systems so i came up with 200
different foods i laid them all out
according to which health defense
systems they activate some cases they
activate all of the health defense
systems i call those grand slammers
because
man a single food will
knock out you know knock the five health
defenses
out of the park it's a home run not to
eat those things
and i explain all the research has been
done by myself and other people to show
how they actually work so what's the
principle to eat to beat disease you can
love your food to love your health
love your food to love your health that
seems so contradictory to what we used
to think about healthy food right
because the old thinking is that well
you got to eat healthy you got to cut
out everything you love
you know and and and i'm i'm turning
that upside down inside out i'm
inverting the whole equation i'm saying
if you look at those 200 foods that i
put down in my book you could be
diseased
take a sharpie out and circle the ones
that you love already i like this i like
that one tomatoes i like oh man i like
this one okay
that's a great starting point because if
you start eating those foods you're
already head of the game because you
already love foods that can actually eat
that can activate your health defenses
now you can explore expand your horizons
by
choosing these other foods that are out
there as well if you sat on tv and
watched a food the food network
you can find all these people
experimenting with different ingredients
if you go onto youtube you can look for
an ingredient you don't recognize [__]
or melon the heck is a bitter melon well
it's an asian gourd is it bitter
absolutely but there are ways of
actually cooking it so it's not so
bitter and it has medicinal value well
how would i do it click on youtube and
search on recipe cooking bitter melon
and you'll watch somebody teach it to
you so
love your food to love your health
explore with your life and just know the
foods i put in the book
activate your body's health defenses
what is a good entry point where they're
not hangry they're not going crazy but
they're still getting some benefits
anti-inflammatory
they're maybe in uh you know ketosis
they've got some autophagy going on like
what does that starter kit fast look
like
all right i'm going to to explain that
right here i'm also going to offer
um because i was a teacher for five
years at the university of california i
wrote every book i've written i haven't
really been a great teacher of the
content i just write them like you
should read it when people order fast
this way and send the receipt to
fastestway.com um i will teach you this
over two weeks like every morning
explaining walking people through this
who are new to fasting ending in a one
or two day spiritual fast so that's the
long answer to the question is this
gonna take me two weeks but i'll show
you the short answer
is that
do 12 hours without food see if you can
do that if you've never done it before
that's not really technically an
intermittent fast you're just showing
yourself you've got legs and you work
yourself up to 14 hours without food and
that's when you're really starting a
real intermittent fast
and then you maybe the next day have
breakfast just lots of protein lots of
fat no carbs for breakfast right you're
taking it easy and then the next day
okay i'm gonna do a 16 hour fast
and
you may use all three of the fasting
hacks because you're ravenous when i was
300 pounds if you told me i was going to
skip breakfast and lunch i'm like i will
kill the people around me like i will be
such a jerk and it was true i ate six or
eight times a day because i knew i'd go
into starvation mode if i didn't and all
this like mental garbage we've been told
so
what you end up with is this idea where
you're slowly gonna work your way up and
it's okay to do that and some mornings
someone's gonna bring in donuts and
you're just gonna break your fast and in
the book i explain the psychology and
the biology of why that happens and it's
just it's okay right you have the rest
of your life to to do this that's why
it's called a fasting practice
and it doesn't have to be perfect
and once you get up to that 68 one day
you're going to sit there and go you
know what
it's lunch time but i'm actually not
that hungry so i am going to for the
first time in my adult life
i am going to just say i'm not going to
eat till dinner and then you're really
kind of tricking yourself because it's
only like four or five more hours until
you've had dinner anyway and then you're
going wait a minute the last time i ate
was dinner yesterday but it wasn't pain
it wasn't suffering it wasn't struggle
it wasn't strife it wasn't pushing it
was just oh okay i could do that i was a
little hungry in the afternoon but i
drink some extra water right maybe you
did use coffee coffee's good for you
anyway right it's okay and then no sugar
or cream i'm assuming thank you no sugar
no cream no protein no artificial
sweetener either you can use stevia or
monk fruit if you want to but definitely
not nutrient or splenda because those
wreck your gut bacteria
and
it it's really shocking and you see this
look at wonder like wow i can't believe
i i thought i would die
right but i didn't i just did 24 hours
and as we talked about earlier that's
you know one meal a day but if the next
day you're like i did yesterday i'm
gonna do it again today and you're still
just getting into it you're probably not
gonna feel as good right so the next day
go back to sixteen eight right like
slowly work up to it and what you're
doing it's like you go to the gym say i
haven't worked out in two years but i'm
gonna go do a full crossfit workout
right i'm gonna do the full wad and then
the next day you're laying on your back
and you're like i think i have to go to
the hospital my kidneys are overloaded
with protein breakdown you know i hate
my life it's because it's okay
when you're exercising yourselves the
way fasting knows it's okay to just get
started in a healthy gentle way and work
yourself up to this i can fast for 48
hours and still be totally fine and and
have my brain work and do interviews
like this and i feel great i can also
eat and feel great but before i'd eat
and then i get the food coma and then
you don't feel very good and then you
gotta have some sugar that doesn't
happen either but if you just go all in
and say i'm gonna start with a 10 day
water fast
man you're gonna feel like crap and the
deal here is fasting is not about
deprivation and it's not supposed to be
about willpower unless
you're doing a spiritual fast
and what i would say is do fasting in a
painless way which is a big part of the
book or
choose to face the pain and use it as a
spiritual personal development practice
two things will happen on your deathbed
if you failed you really went for
something and you failed
one
they will all mourn that you weren't
able to live your life because you were
so myopically focused on the goal
that you forgot to enjoy the journey
and somewhere along the way you stopped
loving you stopped loving them you
stopped loving yourself because all you
could see
was succeeding getting that thing the
tick on the paper box
and you lost your way that's possibility
number one
possibility number two
is there like hey
this [__] tried and it was
inspiring and just to see them go
day after day after day in the face of
so much defeat but to have the will and
determination to keep going
winston churchill said and i quote
success is
going from failure
to failure to failure
without a loss of enthusiasm
it doesn't matter if you win that's not
success
the success is going from the failure to
the failure to the failure and still
being excited to show up
it's like this is how i liken success
success is like love you know the
beautiful part about love getting the
[__] kicked out of you and then coming
back for more
that's so hopeful that's so optimistic
to be like whoa i just had my ass handed
to me and yet i want to be vulnerable
again i want to go through this again i
want to open myself up to this i want to
be touched by that i want to feel that
[__] people can get behind that man
we can get excited about that
we want to be friends with people like
that we want to feel that in our own
lives that willingness to to have tasted
defeat
and still come in open and not jaded how
beautiful is that
there's these three voices in your head
that make you do everything you've ever
been ashamed of and they're coming from
mitochondria and gut bacteria
and getting on top of that and just
owning that that's awesome but if you
have to own it every day on top of
everything else in your life it's gonna
be overwhelming and it's gonna raise
your cortisol and you don't need to do
that to get the benefits what are the
three voices
this is the algorithm that all life runs
it doesn't matter if you're a plant it
doesn't matter if you're a bacteria
which is what's powering us or whether
you know you're a deer and the first
rule is run away from kill or hide from
everything so that's fear and you put 10
times more energy on that than is
necessary
right because from the perspective of
making a life form that will always be
around it should protect itself and you
protect yourself if you're a plant with
hard shells or spikes or toxins and if
you're a bacteria you use toxins or
other defense things
and if you're a person you think you're
out of it and
the second f word which gets about five
times more attention than normal is eat
everything because famines kill lots of
things so now we have fear and we have
food
right and that's why food gets so much
attention when you're fasting because
your bacteria like eat that eat that eat
that eat that eat that and you're like
no no no and eventually it's like a
little kid wearing you down and okay
fine you can have half the cookie johnny
and they're like why do i eat the cookie
i'm such a bad person no your
mitochondria got the best of you it's
okay
and then the third f word what
else does all life have to do to make
sure it's on the earth forever tom
fornicate baby
oh i was thinking fertility but if you
want to just go straight through i'll go
right there
you're correct so i actually was
thinking of the other f word i was just
trying to get you to say it
so nice dodge
what um
what's going on there that gets about
three times more attention than it
deserves
right and
all life has to do it and this explains
everything you've ever done that you're
ashamed of
like all
procrastination all resistance all not
seeing things like that's fear right
eating all the stuff you shouldn't eat
that's food going on that date you know
you shouldn't have gone on
that is the other f word right and this
is in our cells this is not your brain
this is your cellular biology driving
you
to do it our body has five very simple
health defense systems that are um
that have now been discovered they are
number one something called angiogenesis
that's blood vessels that's how our
blood body grows blood vessels angio
means blood blood vessels
genesis is how the body grows blood
vessels we've got 60 000 miles worth of
blood vessels packed in our body and
these are the highways and byways of our
oxygen our nutrients whatever we breathe
whatever we eat in order for ourselves
to get the benefits of the critical
elements of life they have to be carried
by the blood vessels so that's so
critical for our defenses that's healthy
number two
our stem cells you know when we were
kids we were told that starfish and
salamanders can regenerate but humans
can't
guess what that textbook's been thrown
right out the window because humans do
regenerate
just slowly and we know that we
generally regenerate because our hair
grows back um
you know our skin uh can actually heal
and and grow itself back but some of the
crazy things that we're beginning to
actually discover
is that uh if you snip a piece of your
lung off and it'll grow right back at
the very tip if you cut up take away two
thirds of your liver okay let's say that
you have a tumor in your liver you can
remove two-thirds of it and that
one-third will grow the rest of the
liver back kind of like a salamander's
leg it's crazy and of course our nerves
will regenerate and so biotech companies
have been trying for decades now to
figure out how to inject stem cells well
mother nature's already beat them to it
because stem cells are present in our
body as a defense and we're continuously
regenerating ourselves from the inside
out repairing problems you know there's
a road crew inside our body um yours and
mine right here right now that are
fixing things that are invisible to us
third microbiome we can talk more about
this you know it's the tip of the spear
of a whole new frontier
about the human body that we're just
beginning to understand but the
important part of it is that we know
that when we've got good healthy gut
bacteria and this microbiome is the
ecosystem of our gut bacteria i call it
the great barrier reef in our body
you know um 39 trillion bacteria all
living inside there and what we know the
important part for your your viewers and
listeners is that they help when they're
healthy they help to lower inflammation
in our body which then lowers all kinds
of disease they help optimize their
metabolism
everybody's always worried about their
metabolism good gut bacteria helps that
right along
fight fat um helps to avoid um
insulin sensitivity over uh
and avoid glucose uh surges all very
important controls our hormones
you know so that our mood and our brain
so our mood is actually uh healthy as
well and can fight cancer and uh
regulate obesity all kinds of things if
our gut and by the way it's so easy to
disrupt the gut i mean think about a
tanker spill uh that destroys you know a
coral reef that's what we can
accidentally do to ourselves by eating
the wrong things you know if you were
taking a boat by the great barrier reef
and you were to take a a bottle of toxic
material and pour it right down on top
of the coral reef guarantee you that the
fish and the anemones are all going to
be dead okay that's what we do to
ourselves so this higher level of
awareness that we have we have to take
care of our gut microbiome so important
for for defending our health our gut
defends our health fourth our dna
defends us against the environment so
most people think about our dna as our
genetic code yes it is it is the
blueprint for our proteins in our body
that we inherited half from our mom half
from our dad et cetera et cetera however
the the really cool um unsung part of
our dna is that it's one of our bodies
five health defense systems what does it
do it fixes itself what do i mean by
facing itself well we go out you know
during the summer and you go to the
beach and you are enjoying laying out
you know enjoying the weather of beach
weather that ultraviolet radiation is
coming in and mutating your dna
now how come we don't develop cancer all
the time after going to the beach
because our dna is hardwired to fix
itself when it's damaged by the
environment and the beach is one thing
and i'm not even talking about the
tanning salon but i always ask people
when you're actually filling up your car
with gas
like you're you know you're at the gas
tank do you stand upwind or downwind of
the of the of the pump and people go huh
what are you talking about i'm like well
if you smell the fumes the solvents
then you're standing downwind and if you
smell them you're breathing in solvents
they can mutate the dna in your lung so
how can we don't get lung cancer because
our dna fixes itself an amazing defense
system
um uh that our dna plays and then
finally is our immune system which of
course you know after the past year and
a half everybody knows just on how
important good strong immunity
actually is but most people don't know
that even as we get older
our immune system still has the capacity
of fighting invaders not just outside
invaders like viruses and bacteria but
inside invaders like cancer so we are
able to now
and this is one of the most remarkable
things i've seen in my medical career
give people who have cancer even
metastatic cancer that spread
immune treatments that by themselves
don't kill the cancer but uncloak the
cancer so that your immune system can go
after the cancer and even if you've got
metastatic disease even brain metastasis
it's possible in some cases now for your
own immune system to wipe out all traces
of cancer and put you
not just in remission okay that's what
chemo does can put you in remission but
immunotherapy can actually turn the
clock back and reset yourself so you
don't have cancer anymore we've been
talking to kids about rights and we
really should be talking to them about
responsibility and what you owe the
world instead of what the world owes you
now i'll frame it a little we have to
balance those right because i mean even
technically speaking
your rights are my responsibilities and
vice versa and so we can't only have
half the dialogue because
the responsibility makes enables the
rights
so
you know it could easily be that we
could be in a situation where we should
be talking more about rights
but i don't believe that we are in that
situation at the moment
and i i mean i think for me that's been
borne out
by the fact that people have been
interested in what i've been saying
because one of the things i've noticed
time and time again is that whenever i
talk about the relationship between
responsibility and meaning
the crowds that i'm talking to go silent
say look you need a meaning to sustain
you through the vicissitudes of life
okay well try to debate that it's like
is life painful yes is it anxiety
provoking yes is it uncertain yes
is it painful beyond bearing sometimes
yes it's difficult
everyone agrees about that now they
might disagree about how difficult but
that doesn't matter that the central
point holds
okay
what if you think that's all pointless
well that doesn't seem very helpful
okay so you need a sustaining meaning
well where do you find that
well
you generally find it in responsibility
to yourself and other people
and people ask themselves those
questions when when i'm talking because
i ask them to ask themselves those
questions and
that's the answer well what's meaningful
well i have a meaningful relationship
with my father i have a meaningful
relationship with my wife
i have a meaningful relationship with my
pet you know because i take care of that
pet
um when i commit to something
and make sacrifices
that sacrifice is something i also talk
about a lot in both of the last two
books
you know if something's valuable you'll
make sacrifices to attain it that that
discovery of sacrifice i think that's
what separates human it's one of the
primary factors separating human beings
from animals
because we discovered that we could let
go of something we value in the present
and we would gain something we value
even more in the future we acted that
out dramatically in all sorts of strange
ways over thousands and thousands of
years before it was formalizable
psychologically but it's a massive
discovery i can forego gratification in
a particular way
and benefit in the future so i can share
the proceeds of my hunt
and i store up future food in the form
of reputation
and the favors i've owed i'm owed now by
other people
it's a massive discovery